PWA: First PWA tutorial (#27314)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/progressive_web_apps/tutorials/intro/index.md

---
title: Creating your first PWA
slug: Web/Progressive_web_apps/Tutorials/Intro
---

{{NextMenu("Web/Progressive_web_apps/Tutorials/Intro/HTML_and_CSS")}}

{{PWASidebar}}

> This intro-level tutorial walks thru all the steps of building a basic progressive web app, or PWA. We will be using the web technologies we all know and love — HTML, CSS, and JavaScript — to build a period tracking web app called "CycleTracker". Like all web apps, CycleTracker is designed to work in all browsers on all devices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This intro-level tutorial walks thru all the steps of building a basic progressive web app, or PWA. We will be using web technologies — HTML, CSS, and JavaScript — to build a period tracking web app called "CycleTracker". Like all web apps, CycleTracker is designed to work in all browsers on all devices.
```

I'm hoping people who come from other app development background also use this tutorial to get into PWA development. And those people might not already know and love these languages.

We will walk thru the steps of building a fully functional web app, then progressively enhance CycleTracker to make it installable and to work even when the user is offline.

By default, PWAs are regular websites, built with the same technologies. Just like a regular websites, PWAs are linkable, discoverable via search engines, and visible in a browser. By including a manifest file and service worker, and serving the website over SSL, any website can become a PWA.

## PWA benefits

> Using the languages of the web, we will create a fully functioning application that works both online and offline, both in the browsers and on the user's operating systems (OS). Like any regular website, CycleTracker can be hosted on and downloadable from a web server. All we need is a text editor: CycleTracker, like all PWAs, doesn't requie require any additional programming language knowledge, packaging, or proprietary SDK. CycleTracker, like any PWA, can be seamlessly installed on any operating system without the need of app stores (nor app store approval and fees).

Reviewer: > Like any regular website, CycleTracker can be hosted on and downloadable from a web server

I would replace "can be" by "is" in this case. That's how websites work, it's not really an option. And, again trying to make this as welcoming and understandable as possible to non-web people, I think it's always important to make sure they understand the distribution model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the languages of the web, we will create a fully functioning application that works both online and offline, both in the browsers and on the user's operating systems (OS). Like any regular website, CycleTracker is hosted on and downloadable from a web server. All we need is a text editor: CycleTracker, like all PWAs, doesn't require any additional programming language knowledge, packaging, or proprietary SDK. CycleTracker, like any PWA, can be seamlessly installed on any operating system without the need of app stores (nor app store approval and fees).
```

> - Use open web technologies you already know

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Use standard and open web technologies
```

>   - : Historically, for an application to be installable on an OS, such as Windows, iOS, MacOS, Linux, and Android, the applications are developed in OS-supported programming languages, like C#, .Net, Objective C, Swift, Kotlin, Java, or Python. PWAs solve this problem: they use a single code base, written using regular open web technologies: HTML, CSS, and JavaScript.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - : Historically, for an application to be installable on an OS, such as Windows, iOS, MacOS, Linux, and Android, the applications are developed in OS-supported programming languages, like C#, .Net, Objective C, Swift, Kotlin, Java, or Python. PWAs are based on a different model: they use a single code base, written using standard open web technologies that work across OS: HTML, CSS, and JavaScript.
```

I would refrain from saying that using these languages is a problem to be solved. For sure, PWA is an awesome option that makes it possible to use one codebase. But it comes with its pros and cons. And going "native" is also a perfectly good options. It depends on the context.

- No compiling required

>   - : Historically, in most cases, the application code had to be compiled and packaged into an installable format, like .exe, .dmg, .elf, and .apk, or other installable files. Depending on the language, compiling and packaging required the OS's {{glossary("SDK")}}. PWAs solve this problem. Yes, developer teams can have complex build systems, but, as we will demonstrate as we build CycleTracker, PWAs can be built out of just HTML and JavaScript (and CSS, though styling is not necessarily required for a PWA).

Reviewer: I would rephrase this a bit too, similarly to the previous paragraph.
Maybe the word "historically" isn't the best way to frame this. Using OS-native languages and having to compile isn't something of the past (which "historically" makes me think about). And it's not a problem either.
Again, these are just options available to developers. I think our goal is to clearly explain the ins and outs of PWAs, and their benefits, and let readers make their own choices, based on their own specific project constraints.
Our docs should help them understand that having a single codebase is, indeed, a very powerful thing, but we shouldn't have to say that the other options are in the past and problematic.

Author: "With most programming languages, like Java, C/C++, and Kotlin, which are commonly used for building Android apps, and Objective-C and Swift, for iOS, the code needs to be compiled and packaged into an installable format, like .exe, .dmg, .elf, and .apk, or another installable file type, depending on the operating system. Depending on the language, compiling and packaging may require the OS's {{glossary("SDK")}}. PWAs use web technologies supported by every operating system that doesn't need to be packaged or compiled. Yes, developer teams can have complex build systems, but, as we will demonstrate as we build CycleTracker, PWAs can be built out of just HTML and JavaScript (and CSS, though styling is not necessarily required for a PWA)."

- Available anywhere and everywhere

>   - : Historically, single-OS-only applications have bee distributed to users through downloads, often in proprietary app stores. They are available through a vendor like the Apple App Store, [Google Play](https://play.google.com/store/apps), [Microsoft Store App](https://apps.microsoft.com/store/apps), or similar. PWAs don't have these requirements. If you want to distribute your CycleTracker app, you won't require an intermediary. A user can be acquired by visiting the online version of the app.But if you want, the Play Store and App Store do distribute PWAs, undifferentiated from other iOS or Android apps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - : Single-OS-only applications are distributed to users through downloads, often in proprietary app stores. They are available through a vendor like the Apple App Store, [Google Play](https://play.google.com/store/apps), [Microsoft Store App](https://apps.microsoft.com/store/apps), or similar. PWAs don't have these requirements. If you want to distribute your CycleTracker app, you won't require an intermediary. A user can access your app visiting its online version. But if you want, it is possible to distribute your PWA on the Play Store and App Store, undifferentiated from other iOS or Android apps.
```

- Easy for the user to install
  - : Historically, downloaded single-OS-only applications have to be intentionally installed by the user. Depending on the OS, install format, and download origin, this can be a multi-step installation process. PWAs are streamlined. PWAs are available to anyone with a supporting browser, [installable](/en-US/docs/Web/Progressive_web_apps/Guides/Installing) with a couple of clicks.

> ### Compared to OED applications

Reviewer: Maybe explain what OED means.

Author: used Compared to OS-installed software applications insted

Once installed, PWAs can be made to appear and act similarly to other applications installed on the user's device:

- Application window

  - : With a [manifest](/en-US/docs/Web/Progressive_web_apps/Tutorials/Intro/Manifest_file#app_presentation) setting, we'll make CycleTracker open in its own application window, meaning installed PWAs are similar to other installed applications.

- Application icon

>   - : PWAs display an application icon in the same location as other installed applications installed on the users' operating system. This can be an icon on the homescreen, in the toolbar, in the application's folder, or wherever the device displays application icons. We'll learn how to [declare icons](/en-US/docs/Web/Progressive_web_apps/Tutorials/Intro/Manifest_file#app_iconography) for CycleTracker, so, once installed, our PWA can appear like any other OED application on the users device.

Author: ```suggestion
  - : PWAs display an application icon in the same location as other installed applications installed on the users' operating system. This can be an icon on the homescreen, in the toolbar, in the application's folder, or wherever the device displays application icons. We'll learn how to [declare icons](/en-US/docs/Web/Progressive_web_apps/Tutorials/Intro/Manifest_file#app_iconography) for CycleTracker, so, once installed, our PWA can appear like any other installed application on the user's device.
```

- [Local development environment or secure connection](/en-US/docs/Web/Progressive_web_apps/Tutorials/Intro/Secure_connection)

  - : While all websites should be served over https, with PWAs, https is a requirement. Sevice workers, and therefore PWAs, are restricted to secure contexts including SSL contexts served with the `https://` protocol and locally-delivered resources, including `127.0.0.1` and `localhost` URLs served with the `http://` protocol. We will look at the page in the current state with the `file://` protocol, then cover options for creating a secure localhost connection to test your code as we progress thru the tutorial steps. We also look at serving your PWA with Github pages.

- [JavaScript and LocalStorage](/en-US/docs/Web/Progressive_web_apps/Tutorials/Intro/JavaScript_functionality)

  - : Full explanation of the JavaScript functionality to make a client-side period tracker web application so we have a functioning application that can be progressively enhanced into a PWA, using `localStorage` to store period information.

- [Manifest: identity, appearance, and iconography](/en-US/docs/Web/Progressive_web_apps/Tutorials/Intro/Manifest_file)

>   - : A PWA requires a manifest, which is a JSON file that describes the name, icon, description, and other definitions of how the application works within the operating system on which the PWA is installed. We will create a manifest file that defines the appearance of the application when installed, including which icons should be used depending on the user's device, and parameters for the application viewport. We also look at debuggin the manifest file with browser developer tools.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - : A PWA requires a manifest, which is a JSON file that describes the name, icon, description, and other definitions of how the application works within the operating system on which the PWA is installed. We will create a manifest file that defines the appearance of the application when installed, including which icons should be used depending on the user's device, and parameters for the application viewport. We also look at debugging the manifest file with browser developer tools.
```
